the geopolitical overlay here, right?
So, you have sources if you guys have
ever heard about this big story, of
course, sources say that Chinese
President Xi Jinping is pushing
President Donald Trump to oppose Taiwan
independence. Now, the wording that
would mark a major diplomatic win for
Beijing and really comes as both sides
seek this trade deal. Yeah, our
Bloomberg opinion columnist Karishma
Vaswani says that such a shift will be a
major blow to the island and would brand
Washington as an unreliable partner in
the region. She joins us now from
Singapore and yeah, your your column
will US trade Taiwan for TikTok and
tariffs just highlights how interesting,
you know, Taiwan plays into this all.
What's at stake here?
Well, there is so much at stake, Yvonne,
and I found it really interesting, you
know, just picking up from when it where
Annabelle was talking about TSMC and and
being pressured to invest more in terms
of manufacturing in the United States.
Now, if you look at the relationship
between President Donald Trump and
China, particularly in this term, I
think it's fair to say that it's been
defined by the three Ts, as I say in my
column. And that is TikTok, tariffs, and
Taiwan. Now, Taiwan is at the
geopolitical heart of this because, of
course, Trump wants a deal when it comes
to trade. He wants
He has sort of moved and maneuvered a
deal on TikTok, but what China wants,
what the red line for Xi Jinping is, is
to get that ultimate prize, the
legacy-making gold that Xi has stated
very publicly, and that is to unify with
Taiwan either through peaceful means or
by force. And these reports, of course,
coming out that Xi Jinping is looking to
have a discussion with Trump at some
point, if indeed that meeting does go
ahead in October between the two of
them, where he might push, according to
the sources that we've been speaking to,
for a change in this diplomatic language
that has defined the relationship around
Taiwan between the US and China for
decades. Now, if this were to happen,
and it's a big if, currently there are
no indications that that could be the
case, it would really upend the
diplomatic delicate dance around the
geopolitical stakes of this island that
we know it as it stands. It would send a
signal to Japan and Korea that security
could be at risk in the Indo-Pacific,
and it would certainly send a signal to
Southeast Asian countries who are hedged
between the US and Taiwan and China,
rather I should say, that Washington is
an unreliable partner.
Yeah, I think, you know, if we get to
that point, you know, being vague,
you know, ambiguity is not enough,
right? So, tell you know, say it
effectively. How would How big of a
shift would that What would that mean?
That that that change in the wording and
that old language on Taiwan status. What
does that entail? How do I need to be
thinking about the changes that comes
from any potential change there?
Yeah, so strategic ambiguity is the way
that the United States has managed its
relationship with Taiwan. And
effectively, what that means is that it
adheres to the one China principle, but
at the same time, it allows Washington
to be able to deal with Taiwan in the
way that it wants, selling arms to it,
for instance, and having unofficial
relationships with it in the sense that,
you know, for instance, there is a sort
of de facto embassy in the US where
Taiwan representatives have
relationships, conversations,
discussions with US officials. Now, this
has worked for decades, but it really
annoys China, which has done its best
over the last few decades to find a way
to diminish Taiwan's diplomatic status.
And interestingly, in another column
that I wrote last week, for instance,
that relationship was highlighted again
when Taiwan chose to weaponize its chips
diplomacy for what appears to be the
very first time by actually saying to
South Africa,
that was trying to push one of Taiwan's
representative offices to another part
of the country ahead of a meeting with
Xi Jinping, by saying, "Look, if that's
going to happen, you're not going to get
access complete access to our chips."
Now, this was ultimately suspended, but
I think what it shows is a recognition
in Taiwan, and certainly by President
Lai, that he his island is being
squeezed again and again by China in
this relationship with the United
States.
Is there anything then that that that
President Lai Ching-te can do?
Well, you know, he's in an unenviable
position, Yvonne. He's being squeezed
internationally, and he's also being
squeezed at home,
particularly when it comes to trying to
push through some of the things he would
like to see
in the legislature. Now, one of the key
things that the Trump administration has
demanded, not just of Taiwan, but of
countries around the region, is more
defense spending. He really needs to be
able to find a way to get opposition
parties on board to be able to do that
and to push through what he has said in
the budget. And I think the other thing
that would be very useful is to try and
find out exactly how to give Trump what
he wants. Some of the things,
for instance, as Annabelle was talking
about, more of an increase in
manufacturing in the United States, but
at the same time, he's got to ensure
that the silicon shield, which is what
Taiwan's precious gems, precious assets,
those chips that, you know, can't be
made anywhere else for now, they retain
control of that because that is what
lies at the heart of this and what makes
Taiwan so unique and so special both to
the to the United States and to China.